---
slug: /dev/component-api/i18n
---

# Internationalization

Generally it's a good idea to support translations in your plugin, especially if you want to
appeal to the largest userbase. Paper and Adventure make this simple by adding a server-side
translation layer to almost all text that ends up being displayed to clients.

:::info[Javadocs]
Adventure's javadocs for all-things translations can be found [here](https://jd.advntr.dev/api/latest/net/kyori/adventure/translation/package-summary.html).
:::


## GlobalTranslator

All translation is done through the [GlobalTranslator](https://jd.advntr.dev/api/latest/net/kyori/adventure/translation/GlobalTranslator.html). You can render translations yourself and add new sources
for translations.

You can add sources to the `GlobalTranslator` by creating instances of [TranslationRegistry](https://jd.advntr.dev/api/latest/net/kyori/adventure/translation/TranslationRegistry.html) or implementing
the [Translator](https://jd.advntr.dev/api/latest/net/kyori/adventure/translation/Translator.html) interface yourself.

## Where translations work

Vanilla Minecraft handles translations on the client by using the language files bundled with the client or provided via resource packs. If you don't want to send custom language files
in a resource pack, server-side translations are the only alternative. They work anywhere `Component` API exists, except for ItemStack display text like the display name or lore. So
chat, entity display names, scoreboards, tab lists, etc. all support translations.

:::caution
The player's language as declared in the settings packet sent by the client arrives **after** the player has joined the server, so there are no guarantees that
translations will work for a client that is joining during the `PlayerJoinEvent` or any earlier event. You can listen for the first `PlayerClientOptionsChangeEvent` after
joining to know with 100% certainty what language the client that joined is using.
:::


## Examples

### ResourceBundle
```java
TranslationRegistry registry = TranslationRegistry.create(Key.key("namespace:value"));

ResourceBundle bundle = ResourceBundle.getBundle("class.path.lang.en_us", Locale.US, UTF8ResourceBundleControl.get());
registry.registeryAll(Locale.US, bundle, true);
GlobalTranslator.get().addSource(registry);
```

This creates a new `TranslationRegistry` under a specified namespace. Then a `ResourceBundle` is created from a bundle located on the classpath with
the specified `Locale`. Finally, that `ResourceBundle` is added to the registry and the registry is added as a source to the `GlobalTranslator`. This
makes all the translations available server-side.

